COMBINED SCIENCE: TRILOGY (8464) - PHYSICS SECTION (Chapter 6)
================================================================================

--- Page 121 ---
6 Physics subject content
This specification is presented in a two column format.
The subject content is split into three sections for each of the subject areas: biology, chemistry and
physics.
The left hand column contains the subject content that all students must cover, and that can be
assessed in the written papers.
The right hand column exemplifies some of the key opportunities for the following skills to be
developed throughout the course: WS refers to Working scientifically  (page 13), MS refers to 
Mathematical requirements  (page 171) and AT refers to Use of apparatus and techniques  (page
173). These are not the only opportunities. Teachers are encouraged to introduce all of these skills
where appropriate throughout the course.
Each topic begins with an overview. The overview puts the topic into a broader context and is
intended to encourage an overarching approach to both the teaching and learning of each of the
topic areas. It is not directly assessed. Any assessable content in this overview is replicated in the
left hand column.
It is good practice to teach and develop all of the mathematical skills throughout the course. Some
mathematical skills will only be assessed in certain subject areas. These are detailed in 
Mathematical requirements  (page 171).
Science is a practical subject. Details of the assessment of required practicals can be found in 
Required practical activities  (page 175).
Working scientifically  (page 13) and Use of apparatus and techniques  (page 173) skills will be
assessed across all papers.
Content that is only applicable to Higher Tier is indicated by (HT only) either next to the topic
heading where it applies to the whole topic or immediately preceding each paragraph or bullet
point as applicable.
Questions in paper 2 may draw on an understanding of energy changes and transfers due to
heating, mechanical and electrical work and the concept of energy conservation from sections 
Energy  (page 121) and Electricity  (page 127).
6.1 Energy
The concept of energy emerged in the 19th century. The idea was used to explain the work output
of steam engines and then generalised to understand other heat engines. It also became a key tool
for understanding chemical reactions and biological systems.
Limits to the use of fossil fuels and global warming are critical problems for this century. Physicists
and engineers are working hard to identify ways to reduce our energy usage.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   121

--- Page 122 ---
6.1.1 Energy changes in a system, and the ways energy is stored
before and after such changes
6.1.1.1 Energy stores and systems
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
A system is an object or group of objects.
There are changes in the way energy is stored when a system
changes.
Students should be able to describe all the changes involved in the
way energy is stored when a system changes, for common
situations. For example:
• an object projected upwards
• a moving object hitting an obstacle
• an object accelerated by a constant force
• a vehicle slowing down
• bringing water to a boil in an electric kettle.
Throughout this section on Energy students should be able to
calculate the changes in energy involved when a system is changed
by:
• heating
• work done by forces
• work done when a current flowsThe link between work done
(energy transfer) and
current flow in a circuit is
covered in Work done and
energy transfer  (page 146).
WS 4.5
• use calculations to show on a common scale how the overall
energy in a system is redistributed when the system is
changed.WS 1.2, 4.3, 4.5, 4.6
MS 1a, c, 3b, c
6.1.1.2 Changes in energy
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to calculate the amount of energy
associated with a moving object, a stretched spring and an object
raised above ground level.WS 1.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.6
MS 1a, c, 3b, c
122   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 123 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The kinetic energy of a moving object can be calculated using the
equation:
kinetic  energy  = 0.5 × mass ×speed2
Ek = 1
2 m v2
kinetic energy, Ek, in joules, J
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
speed, v, in metres per second, m/s
The amount of elastic potential energy stored in a stretched spring
can be calculated using the equation:MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
elastic  potential  energy  = 0.5 × spring  constant  ×extension2
Ee  = 1
2 k e2
(assuming the limit of proportionality has not been exceeded)
elastic potential energy, Ee, in joules, J
spring constant, k, in newtons per metre, N/m
extension, e, in metres, m
The amount of gravitational potential energy gained by an object
raised above ground level can be calculated using the equation:MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
apply this equation which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet .
g.p.e.  =mass ×gravitational  f ield strength  ×height
Ep =m g h
gravitational potential energy, Ep, in joules, J
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
gravitational field strength, g, in newtons per kilogram, N/kg (In any
calculation the value of the gravitational field strength ( g) will be
given).
height, h, in metres, mMS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
AT 1
Investigate the transfer of
energy from a gravitational
potential energy store to a
kinetic energy store.
6.1.1.3 Energy changes in systems
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The amount of energy stored in or released from a system as its
temperature changes can be calculated using the equation:AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   123

--- Page 124 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
change  in thermal  energy  =mass ×speci f ic  heat capacity  
×temperature  change
∆E =m c  ∆ θ
change in thermal energy, ∆ E, in joules, J
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
specific heat capacity, c, in joules per kilogram per degree Celsius,
J/kg °C
temperature change, ∆ θ, in degrees Celsius, °C
The specific heat capacity of a substance is the amount of energy
required to raise the temperature of one kilogram of the substance
by one degree Celsius.MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
apply this equation which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet .
This equation and specific
heat capacity are also
included in Temperature
changes in a system and
specific heat capacity  (page
137).
Required practical activity 14: an investigation to determine the specific heat capacity of one or
more materials. The investigation will involve linking the decrease of one energy store (or work
done) to the increase in temperature and subsequent increase in thermal energy stored.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 1 and 5.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 184).
124   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 125 ---
6.1.1.4 Power
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Power is defined as the rate at which energy is transferred or the
rate at which work is done.
power  =  energy  trans f erred
time
P = E
t
power  =  work done
time
P = W
t
power, P, in watts, W
energy transferred, E, in joules, J
time, t, in seconds, s
work done, W, in joules, J
An energy transfer of 1 joule per second is equal to a power of 1
watt.
Students should be able to give examples that illustrate the
definition of power eg comparing two electric motors that both lift
the same weight through the same height but one does it faster
than the other.MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply both
equations.
6.1.2 Conservation and dissipation of energy
6.1.2.1 Energy transfers in a system
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Energy can be transferred usefully, stored or dissipated, but cannot
be created or destroyed.
Students should be able to describe with examples where there are
energy transfers in a closed system, that there is no net change to
the total energy.
Students should be able to describe, with examples, how in all
system changes energy is dissipated, so that it is stored in less
useful ways. This energy is often described as being ‘wasted’.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   125

--- Page 126 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to explain ways of reducing unwanted
energy transfers, for example through lubrication and the use of
thermal insulation.
The higher the thermal conductivity of a material the higher the rate
of energy transfer by conduction across the material.
Students should be able to describe how the rate of cooling of a
building is affected by the thickness and thermal conductivity of its
walls.
Students do not need to know the definition of thermal conductivity.WS 1.4
AT 1, 5
Investigate thermal
conductivity using rods of
different materials.
6.1.2.2 Efficiency
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The energy efficiency for any energy transfer can be calculated
using the equation:
e f f iciency  =  use f ul  out put  energy  trans f er
total input  energy  trans f er
Efficiency may also be calculated using the equation:
e f f iciency  =  use f ul  power  out put
total power  input  MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply both
equations.
MS 1a, c, 3b, c
Students may be required
to calculate or use efficiency
values as a decimal or as a
percentage.
(HT only) Students should be able to describe ways to increase the
efficiency of an intended energy transfer.(HT only) WS 1.4
126   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 127 ---
6.1.3 National and global energy resources
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The main energy resources available for use on Earth include: fossil
fuels (coal, oil and gas), nuclear fuel, bio-fuel, wind, hydro-
electricity, geothermal, the tides, the Sun and water waves.
A renewable energy resource is one that is being (or can be)
replenished as it is used.
The uses of energy resources include: transport, electricity
generation and heating.
Students should be able to:
• describe the main energy sources available
• distinguish between energy resources that are renewable and
energy resources that are non-renewable
• compare ways that different energy resources are used, the
uses to include transport, electricity generation and heating
• understand why some energy resources are more reliable
than othersWS 4.4
• describe the environmental impact arising from the use of
different energy resourcesWS 1.3, 1.4
• explain patterns and trends in the use of energy resources.WS 3.5
Descriptions of how energy resources are used to generate
electricity are not required.
Students should be able to:
• consider the environmental issues that may arise from the use
of different energy resources
• show that science has the ability to identify environmental
issues arising from the use of energy resources but not
always the power to deal with the issues because of political,
social, ethical or economic considerations.WS 1.3, 1.4, 4.4
MS 1c, 2c, 4a
6.2 Electricity
Electric charge is a fundamental property of matter everywhere. Understanding the difference in
the microstructure of conductors, semiconductors and insulators makes it possible to design
components and build electric circuits. Many circuits are powered with mains electricity, but
portable electrical devices must use batteries of some kind.
Electrical power fills the modern world with artificial light and sound, information and entertainment,
remote sensing and control. The fundamentals of electromagnetism were worked out by scientists
of the 19th century. However, power stations, like all machines, have a limited lifetime. If we allAQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   127

--- Page 128 ---
continue to demand more electricity this means building new power stations in every generation –
but what mix of power stations can promise a sustainable future?
6.2.1 Current, potential difference and resistance
6.2.1.1 Standard circuit diagram symbols
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Circuit diagrams use standard symbols.
Students should be able to draw and interpret circuit diagrams.WS 1.2
6.2.1.2 Electrical charge and current
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
For electrical charge to flow through a closed circuit the circuit must
include a source of potential difference.
128   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 129 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Electric current is a flow of electrical charge. The size of the electric
current is the rate of flow of electrical charge. Charge flow, current
and time are linked by the equation:
charge  f low =current  ×time
Q  =I t
charge flow, Q, in coulombs, C
current, I, in amperes, A (amp is acceptable for ampere)
time, t, in seconds, s
A current has the same value at any point in a single closed loop.MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
6.2.1.3 Current, resistance and potential difference
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The current ( I) through a component depends on both the
resistance ( R) of the component and the potential difference ( V)
across the component. The greater the resistance of the component
the smaller the current for a given potential difference (pd) across
the component.
Questions will be set using the term potential difference. Students
will gain credit for the correct use of either potential difference or
voltage.
Current, potential difference or resistance can be calculated using
the equation:
potential  di f f erence  =current  ×resistance
V =I R
potential difference, V, in volts, V
current, I, in amperes, A (amp is acceptable for ampere)
resistance, R, in ohms, ΩMS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
Required practical activity 15:  use circuit diagrams to set up and check appropriate circuits to
investigate the factors affecting the resistance of electrical circuits. This should include:
• the length of a wire at constant temperature
• combinations of resistors in series and parallel.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 1, 6 and 7.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 185).AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   129

--- Page 130 ---
6.2.1.4 Resistors
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to explain that, for some resistors, the
value of R remains constant but that in others it can change as the
current changes.
The current through an ohmic conductor (at a constant
temperature) is directly proportional to the potential difference
across the resistor. This means that the resistance remains
constant as the current changes.
The resistance of components such as lamps, diodes, thermistors
and LDRs is not constant; it changes with the current through the
component.
The resistance of a filament lamp increases as the temperature of
the filament increases.
The current through a diode flows in one direction only. The diode
has a very high resistance in the reverse direction.
130   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 131 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The resistance of a thermistor decreases as the temperature
increases.
The applications of thermistors in circuits eg a thermostat is
required.
The resistance of an LDR decreases as light intensity increases.
The application of LDRs in circuits eg switching lights on when it
gets dark is required.
Students should be able to:WS 1.2, 1.4
• explain the design and use of a circuit to measure the
resistance of a component by measuring the current through,
and potential difference across, the component
• draw an appropriate circuit diagram using correct circuit
symbols.AT 6
Investigate the relationship
between the resistance of a
thermistor and temperature.
Investigate the relationship
between the resistance of
an LDR and light intensity.
Students should be able to use graphs to explore whether circuit
elements are linear or non-linear and relate the curves produced to
their function and properties.WS 1.2, 1.4
MS 4c, 4d, 4e
Required practical activity 16:  use circuit diagrams to construct appropriate circuits to investigate
the I–V characteristics of a variety of circuit elements, including a filament lamp, a diode and a
resistor at constant temperature.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 6 and 7.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 186).
6.2.2 Series and parallel circuits
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
There are two ways of joining electrical components, in series and
in parallel. Some circuits include both series and parallel parts.
For components connected in series:
• there is the same current through each component
• the total potential difference of the power supply is shared
between the components
• the total resistance of two components is the sum of the
resistance of each component.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   131

--- Page 132 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Rtotal =R1 +R2
resistance, R, in ohms, Ω
For components connected in parallel:
• the potential difference across each component is the same
• the total current through the whole circuit is the sum of the
currents through the separate components
• the total resistance of two resistors is less than the resistance
of the smallest individual resistor.
Students should be able to:MS 1c, 3b, 3c, 3d
• use circuit diagrams to construct and check series and
parallel circuits that include a variety of common circuit
components
• describe the difference between series and parallel circuits
• explain qualitatively why adding resistors in series increases
the total resistance whilst adding resistors in parallel
decreases the total resistanceAT 7
• explain the design and use of dc series circuits for
measurement and testing purposesWS 1.4
• calculate the currents, potential differences and resistances in
dc series circuits
• solve problems for circuits which include resistors in series
using the concept of equivalent resistance.
Students are not required to calculate the total resistance of two
resistors joined in parallel.MS 1c, 3b, c, d
6.2.3 Domestic uses and safety
6.2.3.1 Direct and alternating potential difference
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Mains electricity is an ac supply. In the United Kingdom the
domestic electricity supply has a frequency of 50 Hz and is about
230 V.
Students should be able to explain the difference between direct
and alternating potential difference.
132   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 133 ---
6.2.3.2 Mains electricity
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Most electrical appliances are connected to the mains using three-
core cable.
The insulation covering each wire is colour coded for easy
identification:
live wire – brown
neutral wire – blue
earth wire – green and yellow stripes.
The live wire carries the alternating potential difference from the
supply. The neutral wire completes the circuit. The earth wire is a
safety wire to stop the appliance becoming live.
The potential difference between the live wire and earth (0 V) is
about 230 V. The neutral wire is at, or close to, earth potential (0 V).
The earth wire is at 0 V, it only carries a current if there is a fault.
Students should be able to explain:
• that a live wire may be dangerous even when a switch in the
mains circuit is open
• the dangers of providing any connection between the live wire
and earth.WS 1.5
6.2.4 Energy transfers
6.2.4.1 Power
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to explain how the power transfer in any
circuit device is related to the potential difference across it and the
current through it, and to the energy changes over time:
power  =potential  di f f erence  ×current
P =V I
power  = current2 ×resistance
P = I2 R
power, P, in watts, W
potential difference, V, in volts, V
current, I, in amperes, A (amp is acceptable for ampere)
resistance, R, in ohms, ΩMS 3b, c
WS 4.5
Students should be able to
recall and apply both
equations.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   133

--- Page 134 ---
6.2.4.2 Energy transfers in everyday appliances
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Everyday electrical appliances are designed to bring about energy
transfers.
The amount of energy an appliance transfers depends on how long
the appliance is switched on for and the power of the appliance.
Students should be able to describe how different domestic
appliances transfer energy from batteries or ac mains to the kinetic
energy of electric motors or the energy of heating devices.
Work is done when charge flows in a circuit.
The amount of energy transferred by electrical work can be
calculated using the equation:
energy  trans f erred  =power  ×time
E =P t
energy  trans f erred  =charge  f low ×potential  di f f erence
E =Q V
energy transferred, E, in joules, J
power, P, in watts, W
time, t, in seconds, s
charge flow, Q, in coulombs, C
potential difference, V, in volts, VMS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply both
equations.
WS 1.4
Students should be able to explain how the power of a circuit device
is related to:
• the potential difference across it and the current through it
• the energy transferred over a given time.
Students should be able to describe, with examples, the
relationship between the power ratings for domestic electrical
appliances and the changes in stored energy when they are in use.WS 1.2
6.2.4.3 The National Grid
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The National Grid is a system of cables and transformers linking
power stations to consumers.
134   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 135 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Electrical power is transferred from power stations to consumers
using the National Grid.
Step-up transformers are used to increase the potential difference
from the power station to the transmission cables then step-down
transformers are used to decrease, to a much lower value, the
potential difference for domestic use.
Students should be able to explain why the National Grid system is
an efficient way to transfer energy.
Higher tier only:
Students should be able to select and use the equation:
potential difference across primary coil x current in primary coil =
potential difference across secondary coil x current in secondary
coil
as given on the equation sheet.WS 1.4
Detailed knowledge of the
structure of a transformer is
not required.
6.3 Particle model of matter
The particle model is widely used to predict the behaviour of solids, liquids and gases and this has
many applications in everyday life. It helps us to explain a wide range of observations and
engineers use these principles when designing vessels to withstand high pressures and
temperatures, such as submarines and spacecraft. It also explains why it is difficult to make a good
cup of tea high up a mountain!
6.3.1 Changes of state and the particle model
6.3.1.1 Density of materials
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The density of a material is defined by the equation:
density =  mass
volume
ρ=m
V
density, ρ, in kilograms per metre cubed, kg/m3
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
volume, V, in metres cubed, m3
The particle model can be used to explain
• the different states of matter
• differences in density.MS 1a, b, c, 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation to changes where
mass is conserved.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   135

--- Page 136 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to recognise/draw simple diagrams to
model the difference between solids, liquids and gases.WS 1.2
Students should be able to explain the differences in density
between the different states of matter in terms of the arrangement
of atoms or molecules.WS 1.2
Required practical activity 17:  use appropriate apparatus to make and record the measurements
needed to determine the densities of regular and irregular solid objects and liquids. Volume should
be determined from the dimensions of regularly shaped objects, and by a displacement technique
for irregularly shaped objects. Dimensions to be measured using appropriate apparatus such as a
ruler, micrometer or Vernier callipers.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 1.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 187).
6.3.1.2 Changes of state
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to describe how, when substances change
state (melt, freeze, boil, evaporate, condense or sublimate), mass is
conserved.
Changes of state are physical changes which differ from chemical
changes because the material recovers its original properties if the
change is reversed.
6.3.2 Internal energy and energy transfers
6.3.2.1 Internal energy
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Energy is stored inside a system by the particles (atoms and
molecules) that make up the system. This is called internal energy.
Internal energy is the total kinetic energy and potential energy of all
the particles (atoms and molecules) that make up a system.
Heating changes the energy stored within the system by increasing
the energy of the particles that make up the system. This either
raises the temperature of the system or produces a change of state.
136   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 137 ---
6.3.2.2 Temperature changes in a system and specific  heat capacity
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
If the temperature of the system increases:
The increase in temperature depends on the mass of the substance
heated, the type of material and the energy input to the system.
The following equation applies:
change  in thermal  energy  =mass ×speci f ic  heat capacity  
×temperature  change
∆E =m c  ∆ θ
change in thermal energy, ∆ E, in joules, J
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
specific heat capacity, c, in joules per kilogram per degree Celsius,
J/kg °C
temperature change, ∆ θ, in degrees Celsius, °C.
The specific heat capacity of a substance is the amount of energy
required to raise the temperature of one kilogram of the substance
by one degree Celsius.MS 1a, 3b, 3c, 3d
Students should be able to
apply this equation, which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet , to calculate
the energy change involved
when the temperature of a
material changes.
This equation and specific
heat capacity are also
included in Energy changes
in systems  (page 123).
6.3.2.3 Changes of state and specific  latent heat
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
If a change of state happens:
The energy needed for a substance to change state is called latent
heat. When a change of state occurs, the energy supplied changes
the energy stored (internal energy) but not the temperature.
The specific latent heat of a substance is the amount of energy
required to change the state of one kilogram of the substance with
no change in temperature.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   137

--- Page 138 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
energy  f or a change  o f state =mass ×speci f ic  latent  heat
E =m L
energy, E, in joules, J
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
specific latent heat, L, in joules per kilogram, J/kg
Specific latent heat of fusion – change of state from solid to liquid
Specific latent heat of vaporisation – change of state from liquid to
vapourMS 1a, 3b, c, d
Students should be able to
apply this equation, which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet , to calculate
the energy change involved
in a change of state.
MS 4a
AT 5
Perform an experiment to
measure the latent heat of
fusion of water.
Students should be able to interpret heating and cooling graphs that
include changes of state.
Students should be able to distinguish between specific heat
capacity and specific latent heat.WS 3.5
6.3.3 Particle model and pressure
6.3.3.1 Particle motion in gases
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The molecules of a gas are in constant random motion. The
temperature of the gas is related to the average kinetic energy of
the molecules.
Changing the temperature of a gas, held at constant volume,
changes the pressure exerted by the gas.WS 1.2
Students should be able to:
• explain how the motion of the molecules in a gas is related to
both its temperature and its pressure
• explain qualitatively the relation between the temperature of a
gas and its pressure at constant volume.WS 1.2
6.4 Atomic structure
Ionising radiation is hazardous but can be very useful. Although radioactivity was discovered over
a century ago, it took many nuclear physicists several decades to understand the structure of
atoms, nuclear forces and stability. Early researchers suffered from their exposure to ionising
radiation. Rules for radiological protection were first introduced in the 1930s and subsequently
138   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 139 ---
improved. Today radioactive materials are widely used in medicine, industry, agriculture and
electrical power generation.
6.4.1 Atoms and isotopes
6.4.1.1 The structure of an atom
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Atoms are very small, having a radius of about 1 × 10-10 metres.
The basic structure of an atom is a positively charged nucleus
composed of both protons and neutrons surrounded by negatively
charged electrons.
The radius of a nucleus is less than 1/10 000 of the radius of an
atom. Most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in the nucleus.
The electrons are arranged at different distances from the nucleus
(different energy levels). The electron arrangements may change
with the absorption of electromagnetic radiation (move further from
the nucleus; a higher energy level) or by the emission of
electromagnetic radiation (move closer to the nucleus; a lower
energy level).MS 1b
WS 4.4
Students should be able to
recognise expressions
given in standard form.
6.4.1.2 Mass number, atomic number and isotopes
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
In an atom the number of electrons is equal to the number of
protons in the nucleus. Atoms have no overall electrical charge.
All atoms of a particular element have the same number of protons.
The number of protons in an atom of an element is called its atomic
number.
The total number of protons and neutrons in an atom is called its
mass number.
Atoms can be represented as shown in this example:
Atoms of the same element can have different numbers of
neutrons; these atoms are called isotopes of that element.
Atoms turn into positive ions if they lose one or more outer
electron(s).
Students should be able to relate differences between isotopes to
differences in conventional representations of their identities,
charges and masses.WS 4.1AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   139

--- Page 140 ---
6.4.1.3 The development of the model of the atom (common content with chemistry)
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
New experimental evidence may lead to a scientific model being
changed or replaced.
Before the discovery of the electron, atoms were thought to be tiny
spheres that could not be divided.
The discovery of the electron led to the plum pudding model of the
atom. The plum pudding model suggested that the atom is a ball of
positive charge with negative electrons embedded in it.
The results from the alpha particle scattering experiment led to the
conclusion that the mass of an atom was concentrated at the centre
(nucleus) and that the nucleus was charged. This nuclear model
replaced the plum pudding model.
Niels Bohr adapted the nuclear model by suggesting that electrons
orbit the nucleus at specific distances. The theoretical calculations
of Bohr agreed with experimental observations.
Later experiments led to the idea that the positive charge of any
nucleus could be subdivided into a whole number of smaller
particles, each particle having the same amount of positive charge.
The name proton was given to these particles.
The experimental work of James Chadwick provided the evidence
to show the existence of neutrons within the nucleus. This was
about 20 years after the nucleus became an accepted scientific
idea.
Students should be able to describe:WS 1.1, 1.6
This historical context
provides an opportunity for
students to show an
understanding of why and
describe how scientific
methods and theories
develop over time.
WS 1.2
• why the new evidence from the scattering experiment led to a
change in the atomic modelWS 1.1
• the difference between the plum pudding model of the atom
and the nuclear model of the atom.WS 1.2
Details of experimental work supporting the Bohr model are not
required.
Details of Chadwick’s experimental work are not required.
140   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 141 ---
6.4.2 Atoms and nuclear radiation
6.4.2.1 Radioactive decay and nuclear radiation
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Some atomic nuclei are unstable. The nucleus gives out radiation
as it changes to become more stable. This is a random process
called radioactive decay.
Activity is the rate at which a source of unstable nuclei decays.
Activity is measured in becquerel (Bq)
Count-rate is the number of decays recorded each second by a
detector (eg Geiger-Muller tube).
The nuclear radiation emitted may be:
• an alpha particle (α) – this consists of two neutrons and two
protons, it is the same as a helium nucleus
• a beta particle (β) – a high speed electron ejected from the
nucleus as a neutron turns into a proton
• a gamma ray (γ) – electromagnetic radiation from the nucleus
• a neutron (n).
Required knowledge of the properties of alpha particles, beta
particles and gamma rays is limited to their penetration through
materials, their range in air and ionising power.
Students should be able to apply their knowledge to the uses of
radiation and evaluate the best sources of radiation to use in a
given situation.WS 1.4, 1.5AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   141

--- Page 142 ---
6.4.2.2 Nuclear equations
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Nuclear equations are used to represent radioactive decay.
In a nuclear equation an alpha particle may be represented by the
symbol:
and a beta particle by the symbol:
The emission of the different types of nuclear radiation may cause a
change in the mass and /or the charge of the nucleus. For example:
So alpha decay causes both the mass and charge of the nucleus to
decrease.
So beta decay does not cause the mass of the nucleus to change
but does cause the charge of the nucleus to increase.
Students are not required to recall these two examples.
Students should be able to use the names and symbols of common
nuclei and particles to write balanced equations that show single
alpha (α) and beta (β) decay. This is limited to balancing the atomic
numbers and mass numbers. The identification of daughter
elements from such decays is not required.
The emission of a gamma ray does not cause the mass or the
charge of the nucleus to change.WS 1.2, 4.1
MS 1b, c, 3c
6.4.2.3 Half-lives and the random nature of radioactive decay
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Radioactive decay is random.
The half-life of a radioactive isotope is the time it takes for the
number of nuclei of the isotope in a sample to halve, or the time it
takes for the count rate (or activity) from a sample containing the
isotope to fall to half its initial level.
142   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 143 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to explain the concept of half-life and how
it is related to the random nature of radioactive decay.WS 1.2
Students should be able to determine the half-life of a radioactive
isotope from given information.MS 4a
(HT only) Students should be able to calculate the net decline,
expressed as a ratio, in a radioactive emission after a given number
of half-lives.(HT only) MS 1c, 3d
6.4.2.4 Radioactive contamination
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Radioactive contamination is the unwanted presence of materials
containing radioactive atoms on other materials. The hazard from
contamination is due to the decay of the contaminating atoms. The
type of radiation emitted affects the level of hazard.
Irradiation is the process of exposing an object to nuclear radiation.
The irradiated object does not become radioactive.WS 1.5
Students should be able to compare the hazards associated with
contamination and irradiation.WS 1.5
Suitable precautions must be taken to protect against any hazard
that the radioactive source used in the process of irradiation may
present.WS 1.5
Students should understand that it is important for the findings of
studies into the effects of radiation on humans to be published and
shared with other scientists so that the findings can be checked by
peer review.WS 1.6
6.5 Forces
Engineers analyse forces when designing a great variety of machines and instruments, from road
bridges and fairground rides to atomic force microscopes. Anything mechanical can be analysed in
this way. Recent developments in artificial limbs use the analysis of forces to make movement
possible.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   143

--- Page 144 ---
6.5.1 Forces and their interactions
6.5.1.1 Scalar and vector quantities
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Scalar quantities have magnitude only.
Vector quantities have magnitude and an associated direction.
A vector quantity may be represented by an arrow. The length of
the arrow represents the magnitude, and the direction of the arrow
the direction of the vector quantity.
6.5.1.2 Contact and non-contact forces
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
A force is a push or pull that acts on an object due to the interaction
with another object. All forces between objects are either:
• contact forces – the objects are physically touching
• non-contact forces – the objects are physically separated.
Examples of contact forces include friction, air resistance, tension
and normal contact force.
Examples of non-contact forces are gravitational force, electrostatic
force and magnetic force.
Force is a vector quantity.
Students should be able to describe the interaction between pairs
of objects which produce a force on each object. The forces to be
represented as vectors.
6.5.1.3 Gravity
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Weight is the force acting on an object due to gravity. The force of
gravity close to the Earth is due to the gravitational field around the
Earth.
The weight of an object depends on the gravitational field strength
at the point where the object is.
144   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 145 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The weight of an object can be calculated using the equation:
weight  = mass  × gravitational field strength
 W =m g 
weight, W, in newtons, N
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
gravitational field strength, g, in newtons per kilogram, N/kg (In any
calculation the value of the gravitational field strength ( g) will be
given.)
The weight of an object may be considered to act at a single point
referred to as the object’s ‘centre of mass’.MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
The weight of an object and the mass of an object are directly
proportional.
Weight is measured using a calibrated spring-balance (a
newtonmeter).MS 3a
Students should recognise
and be able to use the
symbol for proportionality, ∝
6.5.1.4 Resultant forces
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
A number of forces acting on an object may be replaced by a single
force that has the same effect as all the original forces acting
together. This single force is called the resultant force.
Students should be able to calculate the resultant of two forces that
act in a straight line.
(HT only) Students should be able to:
• describe examples of the forces acting on an isolated object
or system
• use free body diagrams to describe qualitatively examples
where several forces lead to a resultant force on an object,
including balanced forces when the resultant force is zero.
(HT only) A single force can be resolved into two components
acting at right angles to each other. The two component forces
together have the same effect as the single force.WS 1.2
(HT only) Students should be able to use vector diagrams to
illustrate resolution of forces, equilibrium situations and determine
the resultant of two forces, to include both magnitude and direction
(scale drawings only).MS 4a, 5a, bAQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   145

--- Page 146 ---
6.5.2 Work done and energy transfer
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
When a force causes an object to move through a distance work is
done on the object. So a force does work on an object when the
force causes a displacement of the object.
The work done by a force on an object can be calculated using the
equation:
work done = force × distance 
moved along the line of action of the force
 W =F s 
work done, W, in joules, J
force, F, in newtons, N
distance, s, in metresMS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
One joule of work is done when a force of one newton causes a
displacement of one metre.
1 joule = 1 newton-metre
Students should be able to describe the energy transfer involved
when work is done.WS 4.5
Students should be able to convert between newton-metres and
joules.
Work done against the frictional forces acting on an object causes a
rise in the temperature of the object.MS 1c
WS 4.5
6.5.3 Forces and elasticity
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to:
• give examples of the forces involved in stretching, bending or
compressing an object
• explain why, to change the shape of an object (by stretching,
bending or compressing), more than one force has to be
applied – this is limited to stationary objects only
• describe the difference between elastic deformation and
inelastic deformation caused by stretching forces.
The extension of an elastic object, such as a spring, is directly
proportional to the force applied, provided that the limit of
proportionality is not exceeded.
146   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 147 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
f orce  =spring  constant  ×extension
 F =k e 
force, F, in newtons, N
spring constant, k, in newtons per metre, N/m
extension, e, in metres, mMS 3b, c, 4a
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
This relationship also applies to the compression of an elastic
object, where ‘ e’ would be the compression of the object.
A force that stretches (or compresses) a spring does work and
elastic potential energy is stored in the spring. Provided the spring
is not inelastically deformed, the work done on the spring and the
elastic potential energy stored are equal.
Students should be able to:
• describe the difference between a linear and non-linear
relationship between force and extension
• calculate a spring constant in linear casesMS 3b, c, 4a
• interpret data from an investigation of the relationship
between force and extensionWS 3.5
• calculate work done in stretching (or compressing) a spring
(up to the limit of proportionality) using the equation:
elastic  potential  energy  = 0.5 × spring  constant  ×extension2
Ee  = 1
2 k e2MS 3c
Students should be able to
apply this equation which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet .
This equation is also given
in Changes in energy  (page
122).
Students should be able to calculate relevant values of stored
energy and energy transfers.MS 3c
Required practical activity 18:  investigate the relationship between force and extension for a
spring.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 1 and 2.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 188).
6.5.4 Forces and motion
6.5.4.1 Describing motion along a lineAQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   147

--- Page 148 ---
6.5.4.1.1 Distance and displacement
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Distance is how far an object moves. Distance does not involve
direction. Distance is a scalar quantity.
Displacement includes both the distance an object moves,
measured in a straight line from the start point to the finish point
and the direction of that straight line. Displacement is a vector
quantity.
Students should be able to express a displacement in terms of both
the magnitude and direction.MS 1, 3c
Throughout this section
(Forces and motion),
students should be able to
use ratios and proportional
reasoning to convert units
and to compute rates.
6.5.4.1.2 Speed
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Speed does not involve direction. Speed is a scalar quantity.
The speed of a moving object is rarely constant. When people walk,
run or travel in a car their speed is constantly changing.
The speed at which a person can walk, run or cycle depends on
many factors including: age, terrain, fitness and distance travelled.
Typical values may be taken as:
walking ̴ 1.5 m/s
running ̴ 3 m/s
cycling ̴ 6 m/s.
Students should be able to recall typical values of speed for a
person walking, running and cycling as well as the typical values of
speed for different types of transportation systems.
It is not only moving objects that have varying speed. The speed of
sound and the speed of the wind also vary.
A typical value for the speed of sound in air is 330 m/s.
Students should be able to make measurements of distance and
time and then calculate speeds of objects.
For an object moving at constant speed the distance travelled in a
specific time can be calculated using the equation:MS 1a, c, 2f
148   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 149 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
distance  travelled  =speed  ×time
s =v t
distance, s, in metres, m
speed, v, in metres per second, m/s
time, t, in seconds, sMS 3b, 3c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
Students should be able to calculate average speed for non-uniform
motion.MS 3b, 3c
6.5.4.1.3 Velocity
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The velocity of an object is its speed in a given direction. Velocity is
a vector quantity.
Students should be able to explain the vector–scalar distinction as it
applies to displacement, distance, velocity and speed.
(HT only) Students should be able to explain qualitatively, with
examples, that motion in a circle involves constant speed but
changing velocity.
6.5.4.1.4 The distance–time relationship
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
If an object moves along a straight line, the distance travelled can
be represented by a distance–time graph.
The speed of an object can be calculated from the gradient of its
distance–time graph.
(HT only) If an object is accelerating, its speed at any particular time
can be determined by drawing a tangent and measuring the
gradient of the distance–time graph at that time.
Students should be able to draw distance–time graphs from
measurements and extract and interpret lines and slopes of
distance–time graphs, translating information between graphical
and numerical form.
Students should be able to determine speed from a distance–time
graph.MS 4a, b, c, d, fAQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   149

--- Page 150 ---
6.5.4.1.5 Acceleration
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The average acceleration of an object can be calculated using the
equation:
acceleration  =change  in velocity
time taken
a = ∆v
t
acceleration, a, in metres per second squared, m/s2
change in velocity, ∆ v, in metres per second, m/s
time, t, in seconds, s
An object that slows down is decelerating.
Students should be able to estimate the magnitude of everyday
accelerations.MS 1d, 3b, 3c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
The acceleration of an object can be calculated from the gradient of
a velocity–time graph.
(HT only) The distance travelled by an object (or displacement of an
object) can be calculated from the area under a velocity–time
graph.
Students should be able to:MS 4a, b, c, d, f
• draw velocity–time graphs from measurements and interpret
lines and slopes to determine acceleration
• (HT only) interpret enclosed areas in velocity–time graphs to
determine distance travelled (or displacement)WS 3.3
• (HT only) measure, when appropriate, the area under a
velocity–time graph by counting squares.WS 3.3
The following equation applies to uniform acceleration:
f inal velocity2 −initial  velocity2= 2 × acceleration  ×distance
v2  − u2 = 2 a s
final velocity, v, in metres per second, m/s
initial velocity, u, in metres per second, m/s
acceleration, a, in metres per second squared, m/s2
distance, s, in metres, m
Near the Earth’s surface any object falling freely under gravity has
an acceleration of about 9.8 m/s2.MS 3b, 3c
Students should be able to
apply this equation which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet .
150   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 151 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
An object falling through a fluid initially accelerates due to the force
of gravity. Eventually the resultant force will be zero and the object
will move at its terminal velocity.
6.5.4.2 Forces, accelerations and Newton's Laws of motion
6.5.4.2.1 Newton's First Law
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Newton’s First Law:
If the resultant force acting on an object is zero and:
• the object is stationary, the object remains stationary
• the object is moving, the object continues to move at the
same speed and in the same direction. So the object
continues to move at the same velocity.
So, when a vehicle travels at a steady speed the resistive forces
balance the driving force.
So, the velocity (speed and/or direction) of an object will only
change if a resultant force is acting on the object.
Students should be able to apply Newton’s First Law to explain the
motion of objects moving with a uniform velocity and objects where
the speed and/or direction changes.
(HT only) The tendency of objects to continue in their state of rest
or of uniform motion is called inertia.
6.5.4.2.2 Newton's Second Law
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Newton’s Second Law:
The acceleration of an object is proportional to the resultant force
acting on the object, and inversely proportional to the mass of the
object.
As an equation:MS 3a
Students should recognise
and be able to use the
symbol for proportionality, ∝AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   151

--- Page 152 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
resultant  f orce  =mass ×acceleration
F =m a
force, F, in newtons, N
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
acceleration, a, in metres per second squared, m/s2MS 3b, c
WS 4.2
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
(HT only) Students should be able to explain that:
• inertial mass is a measure of how difficult it is to change the
velocity of an object
• inertial mass is defined as the ratio of force over acceleration.MS 3a
Students should be able to estimate the speed, accelerations and
forces involved in large accelerations for everyday road transport.
Students should recognise and be able to use the symbol that
indicates an approximate value or approximate answer, ̴MS 1d
Required practical activity 19:  investigate the effect of varying the force on the acceleration of an
object of constant mass, and the effect of varying the mass of an object on the acceleration
produced by a constant force.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 1, 2 and 3.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 189).
6.5.4.2.3 Newton's Third Law
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Newton’s Third Law:
Whenever two objects interact, the forces they exert on each other
are equal and opposite.
Students should be able to apply Newton’s Third Law to examples
of equilibrium situations.WS 1.2
6.5.4.3 Forces and braking
152   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 153 ---
6.5.4.3.1 Stopping distance
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The stopping distance of a vehicle is the sum of the distance the
vehicle travels during the driver’s reaction time (thinking distance)
and the distance it travels under the braking force (braking
distance). For a given braking force the greater the speed of the
vehicle, the greater the stopping distance.
6.5.4.3.2 Reaction time
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Reaction times vary from person to person. Typical values range
from 0.2 s to 0.9 s.
A driver’s reaction time can be affected by tiredness, drugs and
alcohol. Distractions may also affect a driver’s ability to react.
Students should be able to:
• explain methods used to measure human reaction times and
recall typical results
• interpret and evaluate measurements from simple methods to
measure the different reaction times of studentsWS 3.5, 3.7
• evaluate the effect of various factors on thinking distance
based on given data.WS 1.5, 2.2
MS 1a, c
AT 1
Measure the effect of
distractions on reaction
time.
6.5.4.3.3 Factors affecting braking distance 1
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The braking distance of a vehicle can be affected by adverse road
and weather conditions and poor condition of the vehicle.
Adverse road conditions include wet or icy conditions. Poor
condition of the vehicle is limited to the vehicle's brakes or tyres.
Students should be able to:
• explain the factors which affect the distance required for road
transport vehicles to come to rest in emergencies, and the
implications for safetyAQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   153

--- Page 154 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
• estimate how the distance required for road vehicles to stop in
an emergency varies over a range of typical speeds.MS 1c, 1d, 2c, 2d, 2f, 2h,
3b, 3c
6.5.4.3.4 Factors affecting braking distance 2
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
When a force is applied to the brakes of a vehicle, work done by the
friction force between the brakes and the wheel reduces the kinetic
energy of the vehicle and the temperature of the brakes increases.
The greater the speed of a vehicle the greater the braking force
needed to stop the vehicle in a certain distance.
The greater the braking force the greater the deceleration of the
vehicle. Large decelerations may lead to brakes overheating and/or
loss of control.
Students should be able to:
• explain the dangers caused by large decelerations WS 1.5
• (HT only) estimate the forces involved in the deceleration of
road vehicles in typical situations on a public road.(HT only) MS 1d
6.5.5 Momentum (HT only)
6.5.5.1 Momentum is a property of moving objects
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Momentum is defined by the equation:
momentum  =mass ×velocity
p =m v
momentum, p, in kilograms metre per second, kg m/s
mass, m, in kilograms, kg
velocity, v, in metres per second, m/sWS 1.2
MS 3b, c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
154   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 155 ---
6.5.5.2 Conservation of momentum
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
In a closed system, the total momentum before an event is equal to
the total momentum after the event.
This is called conservation of momentum.
Students should be able to use the concept of momentum as a
model to describe and explain examples of momentum in an event,
such as a collision.AT 1, 2, 3
Investigate collisions
between laboratory trollies
using light gates, data
loggers or ticker timers to
measure and record data.
6.6 Waves
Wave behaviour is common in both natural and man-made systems. Waves carry energy from one
place to another and can also carry information. Designing comfortable and safe structures such
as bridges, houses and music performance halls requires an understanding of mechanical waves.
Modern technologies such as imaging and communication systems show how we can make the
most of electromagnetic waves.
6.6.1 Waves in air, fluids  and solids
6.6.1.1 Transverse and longitudinal waves
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Waves may be either transverse or longitudinal.
The ripples on a water surface are an example of a transverse
wave.
Longitudinal waves show areas of compression and rarefaction.
Sound waves travelling through air are longitudinal.
Students should be able to describe the difference between
longitudinal and transverse waves.WS 1.2
Students should be able to describe evidence that, for both ripples
on a water surface and sound waves in air, it is the wave and not
the water or air itself that travels.WS 1.2, 2.2AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   155

--- Page 156 ---
6.6.1.2 Properties of waves
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Students should be able to describe wave motion in terms of their
amplitude, wavelength, frequency and period.
The amplitude of a wave is the maximum displacement of a point
on a wave away from its undisturbed position.
The wavelength of a wave is the distance from a point on one wave
to the equivalent point on the adjacent wave.
The frequency of a wave is the number of waves passing a point
each second.MS 1c, 3b, c
period =  1
f requency
T= 1
f
period, T, in seconds, s
frequency, f, in hertz, Hz
The wave speed is the speed at which the energy is transferred (or
the wave moves) through the medium.
All waves obey the wave equation:MS 1c, 3b, c
Students should be able to
apply this equation which is
given on the Physics
equation sheet .
wave speed  =f requency  ×wavelength
v =f   λ
wave speed, v, in metres per second, m/s
frequency, f, in hertz, Hz
wavelength, λ, in metres, m
Students should be able to:
• identify amplitude and wavelength from given diagramsMS 1c, 3b, 3c
Students should be able to
recall and apply this
equation.
• describe a method to measure the speed of sound waves in
airAT 1
WS 2.3, 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 3.1,
3.5
• describe a method to measure the speed of ripples on a water
surface.AT 1, AT 4
WS 2.3, 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 3.1,
3.5
Required practical activity 20: make observations to identify the suitability of apparatus to
measure the frequency, wavelength and speed of waves in a ripple tank and waves in a solid and
take appropriate measurements.
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 4.
156   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 157 ---
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 191).
6.6.2 Electromagnetic waves
6.6.2.1 Types of electromagnetic waves
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Electromagnetic waves are transverse waves that transfer energy
from the source of the waves to an absorber.
Electromagnetic waves form a continuous spectrum and all types of
electromagnetic wave travel at the same velocity through a vacuum
(space) or air.
The waves that form the electromagnetic spectrum are grouped in
terms of their wavelength and their frequency. Going from long to
short wavelength (or from low to high frequency) the groups are:
radio, microwave, infrared, visible light (red to violet), ultraviolet, X-
rays and gamma rays.
Our eyes only detect visible light and so detect a limited range of
electromagnetic waves.
Students should be able to give examples that illustrate the transfer
of energy by electromagnetic waves.
6.6.2.2 Properties of electromagnetic waves 1
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
(HT only) Different substances may absorb, transmit, refract or
reflect electromagnetic waves in ways that vary with wavelength.
(HT only) Some effects, for example refraction, are due to the
difference in velocity of the waves in different substances.
Students should be able to construct ray diagrams to illustrate the
refraction of a wave at the boundary between two different media.
(HT only) Students should be able to use wave front diagrams to
explain refraction in terms of the change of speed that happens
when a wave travels from one medium to a different medium.WS 1.2
Required practical activity 21:  investigate how the amount of infrared radiation absorbed or
radiated by a surface depends on the nature of that surface.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   157

--- Page 158 ---
AT skills covered by this practical activity: physics AT 1 and 4.
This practical activity also provides opportunities to develop WS and MS. Details of all skills are
given in Key opportunities for skills development  (page 191).
6.6.2.3 Properties of electromagnetic waves 2
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
(HT only) Radio waves can be produced by oscillations in electrical
circuits.
(HT only) When radio waves are absorbed they may create an
alternating current with the same frequency as the radio wave itself,
so radio waves can themselves induce oscillations in an electrical
circuit.
Changes in atoms and the nuclei of atoms can result in
electromagnetic waves being generated or absorbed over a wide
frequency range. Gamma rays originate from changes in the
nucleus of an atom.
Ultraviolet waves, X-rays and gamma rays can have hazardous
effects on human body tissue. The effects depend on the type of
radiation and the size of the dose. Radiation dose (in sieverts) is a
measure of the risk of harm resulting from an exposure of the body
to the radiation.WS 1.5
1000 millisieverts (mSv) = 1 sievert (Sv)
Students will not be required to recall the unit of radiation dose.
Students should be able to draw conclusions from given data about
the risks and consequences of exposure to radiation.
Ultraviolet waves can cause skin to age prematurely and increase
the risk of skin cancer. X-rays and gamma rays are ionising
radiation that can cause the mutation of genes and cancer.WS 1.5
6.6.2.4 Uses and applications of electromagnetic waves
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
Electromagnetic waves have many practical applications. For
example:
• radio waves – television and radio
• microwaves – satellite communications, cooking food
• infrared – electrical heaters, cooking food, infrared cameras
• visible light – fibre optic communications
• ultraviolet – energy efficient lamps, sun tanning
• X-rays and gamma rays – medical imaging and treatments.
158   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 159 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
(HT only) Students should be able to give brief explanations why
each type of electromagnetic wave is suitable for the practical
application.(HT only) WS 1.4
6.7 Magnetism and electromagnetism
Electromagnetic effects are used in a wide variety of devices. Engineers make use of the fact that
a magnet moving in a coil can produce electric current and also that when current flows around a
magnet it can produce movement. It means that systems that involve control or communications
can take full advantage of this.
6.7.1 Permanent and induced magnetism, magnetic forces and fields
6.7.1.1 Poles of a magnet
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The poles of a magnet are the places where the magnetic forces
are strongest. When two magnets are brought close together they
exert a force on each other. Two like poles repel each other. Two
unlike poles attract each other. Attraction and repulsion between
two magnetic poles are examples of non-contact force.
A permanent magnet produces its own magnetic field. An induced
magnet is a material that becomes a magnet when it is placed in a
magnetic field. Induced magnetism always causes a force of
attraction. When removed from the magnetic field an induced
magnet loses most/all of its magnetism quickly.
Students should be able to describe:
• the attraction and repulsion between unlike and like poles for
permanent magnets
• the difference between permanent and induced magnets.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   159

--- Page 160 ---
6.7.1.2 Magnetic fields
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
The region around a magnet where a force acts on another magnet
or on a magnetic material (iron, steel, cobalt and nickel) is called
the magnetic field.
The force between a magnet and a magnetic material is always one
of attraction.
The strength of the magnetic field depends on the distance from the
magnet. The field is strongest at the poles of the magnet.
The direction of the magnetic field at any point is given by the
direction of the force that would act on another north pole placed at
that point. The direction of a magnetic field line is from the north
(seeking) pole of a magnet to the south(seeking) pole of the
magnet.
A magnetic compass contains a small bar magnet. The Earth has a
magnetic field. The compass needle points in the direction of the
Earth’s magnetic field.
Students should be able to:
• describe how to plot the magnetic field pattern of a magnet
using a compass
• draw the magnetic field pattern of a bar magnet showing how
strength and direction change from one point to another
• explain how the behaviour of a magnetic compass is related
to evidence that the core of the Earth must be magnetic.WS 2.2
6.7.2 The motor effect
160   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

--- Page 161 ---
6.7.2.1 Electromagnetism
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
When a current flows through a conducting wire a magnetic field is
produced around the wire. The strength of the magnetic field
depends on the current through the wire and the distance from the
wire.
Shaping a wire to form a solenoid increases the strength of the
magnetic field created by a current through the wire. The magnetic
field inside a solenoid is strong and uniform.
The magnetic field around a solenoid has a similar shape to that of
a bar magnet. Adding an iron core increases the strength of the
magnetic field of a solenoid. An electromagnet is a solenoid with an
iron core.
Students should be able to:
• describe how the magnetic effect of a current can be
demonstrated
• draw the magnetic field pattern for a straight wire carrying a
current and for a solenoid (showing the direction of the field)
• explain how a solenoid arrangement can increase the
magnetic effect of the current.WS 2.2
6.7.2.2 Fleming's left-hand rule (HT only)
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
When a conductor carrying a current is placed in a magnetic field
the magnet producing the field and the conductor exert a force on
each other. This is called the motor effect.
Students should be able to show that Fleming's left-hand rule
represents the relative orientation of the force, the current in the
conductor and the magnetic field.
Students should be able to recall the factors that affect the size of
the force on the conductor.AQA GCSE Combined Science: Trilogy 8464. GCSE exams June 2018 onwards. Version 1.1 04 October 2019
Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration   161

--- Page 162 ---
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
For a conductor at right angles to a magnetic field and carrying a
current:
f orce  =magnetic  f lux density  ×current  ×length  
F =B I l
force, F, in newtons, N
magnetic flux density, B, in tesla, T
current, I, in amperes, A (amp is acceptable for ampere)
length, l, in metres, mMS 3b, c
Students should be able to
apply this equation which is
given on the physics
equation sheet .
6.7.2.3 Electric motors (HT only)
Content Key opportunities for
skills development
A coil of wire carrying a current in a magnetic field tends to rotate.
This is the basis of an electric motor.
Students should be able to explain how the force on a conductor in
a magnetic field causes the rotation of the coil in an electric motor.
6.8 Key ideas
The complex and diverse phenomena of the natural and man-made world can be described in
terms of a small number of key ideas in physics.
These key ideas are of universal application, and we have embedded them throughout the subject
content. They underpin many aspects of the science assessment and will therefore be assessed
across all papers.
Key ideas in physics:
• the use of models, as in the particle model of matter or the wave models of light and of sound
• the concept of cause and effect in explaining such links as those between force and
acceleration, or between changes in atomic nuclei and radioactive emissions
• the phenomena of ‘action at a distance’ and the related concept of the field as the key to
analysing electrical, magnetic and gravitational effects
• that differences, for example between pressures or temperatures or electrical potentials, are
the drivers of change
• that proportionality, for example between weight and mass of an object or between force and
extension in a spring, is an important aspect of many models in science
• that physical laws and models are expressed in mathematical form.
162   Visit aqa.org.uk/8464  for the most up-to-date specification,  resources, support and administration

